 Very clearly one of the things that I want to do is I want to enhance the student experience. And we are facing the problems of our success or that when I was a faculty member, no one would sleep in my class and I would do things which will make it exciting. The main thing to do is we need to have many more opportunities for students with quality education. That's the only long term student. I think the student student is a very nice place. First I would like to ask you about your entire journey. You are a mechanical engineering graduate from IIT, Bombay and you have a PhD from the same institute. This makes me want to ask what is your memory of preparing for the IIT JE examination? Did you also like a lot of students lock yourself in a room to study all day? It was, you know, we are talking of a time long back. Okay. It's 1982 is when I gave the JE. At that time the JE was a subjective JE. So we had difficult questions, but it was, you know, it's also not just the answer. It's not like an MCQ. And we didn't, we did study during the 11th and 12th. And so it wasn't, I don't think it was as difficult to get in as it is now. After that, I have, I did my BTEC, I did the four year BTEC 82 to 86. Then I worked for a year. And then I came back and did my PhD at IIT Bombay. I worked for three years and then joined the faculty. So I, I've essentially, apart from four years of my life, I've always been on an IIT campus. So that's been my sort of journey. From the time you appeared for the exam still now, there's been a lot of changes in the exam patterns in the way children prepare for those exams. Recently, there's also news of JE and need being merged together. And JE means is occurring four times consecutively every month now, so that children get, students get more attempts. So what are your views on this? Like how is it impacted the, you know, what happens? I think we are the IIT system. We are facing the problems of our success. The, you know, in the, when I did my BTEC, there was not that much hype about the IITs and the alumni. Subsequently, after the Internet boom and the kind of the Silicon Valley successes, essentially IIT became a much more preferred destination. So today, if you see in IIT Delhi, in order to get in, you have to be in the top 3000 or so. And that's out of nine lakhs, you can do the percentage. It's a very small percentage. So, nowhere in the world do you have this kind of selectivity. And this is a problem. So it really is highly competitive and it's more, I mean, there are lots of people who get rejected who are very good also. So this is, this is a problem and whatever exam you do, I don't know. And the main thing to do is we need to have many more opportunities for students with quality education. That's the only long-term solution. So coming over to more of you, you were in the field of research and teaching for a very long duration. How does it feel to have administrative duties now? And if you ever feel disconnected with the current responsibilities you have. So, you know, I really enjoy, enjoyed teaching. I'm saying enjoy teaching because I'm not teaching full-time now or I mean, I'm taking some occasional classes, but really enjoy teaching. I really enjoy interacting with students and the administration is somewhat different, but also the thing is that you do want to see you've been in the system. I've been a student, I've been a faculty. There are many things you feel that, why is it like this? Can you improve this? So there are things that you feel that you can do. And as an administrator, you have the opportunity to do that. There are also constraints, of course. But I think going down, I would definitely want to have more discussions and direct interaction with students and hopefully also teach at least part of courses. It's a choice that I have taken. And here, so that's how I'm in it. What did you enjoy being a student or a professor at IIT? I think a student. I'll tell you, actually, as a student, you feel empowered. You also, you don't see any constraints. You feel you can do anything. And as a student, I used to feel that the faculty lectures are so boring. And why should it be like this? You should actually make it exciting. What's going on? And I thought that when I was a faculty member, no one would sleep in my class. And I would do things which would make it exciting. But when you go to the other side, you find that people sleep in your class. And you try all kinds of stuff, but it doesn't happen. So it's different perspectives. I think the student phase is a very nice phase. And one should really enjoy that phase. Coming to the student phase, do you have any best hostel experience? Oh, there are many hostel experiences. So we, as a student, I was involved. I was also an active student. And in our final year, we had this thing where we called, we had from each department a set of, it was like a final year thing. We called, we had a meeting where we wanted to give our experiences of what is, what the institute should do to make the educational experience better. And we had two people from each department and we called several faculty members. And we had a whole host of things we thought we'd. Yeah, so we really believe that we could change everything. Of course, in the hostel things, there are interhostel rivalries. I'm sure it's there here also. You have these, you have these competitions and then there are things. And so sometimes it goes out of hand, you sort of reconcile it. So there are many, many such stories and I used to try to, even there I used to try and reconcile things and it used to be. Yeah, so, but it's a very exciting. Coming over to daily itself, what is your favorite spot on campus? There's a lot of greenery, lots of peacocks and wildlife on. And so it's really a beautiful, beautiful campus. The lecture hall complex I really like. And if you go in, it's impressive you go around. I remember when I, when the first year batch just came in after the second semester, I went to sort of see, I wanted to see whether, you know, we are able to, whether the there's too much crowding in the lift or that COVID protocols are being maintained. And it was very exciting to see all these kids coming into class and the excitement. They've given an opportunity, which course would you register in? Well, I've always wanted to do economics. So that's, that's one thing, philosophy. What is the worst grade you received an IIT? I think a CD, we used to call it a CD is what, what would it mean? C and C minus, C and C minus, I got a C minus in one of the courses. I think it was an engineering drawing. What are the extra curriculums very part of in your IIT? Well, I, I was mainly into, you know, debating, quizzing, all the cultural things I used to organize certain things also. I mean, I, I'm not good at sports, but I used to generally play, like a, where you play football tennis, table tennis and cricket, but not, not good at in any way. But I did, yeah, I did, I used to teach as an, I used to be part of many of the, I was the literary secretary of the hostel and do you have an IIT director, WhatsApp group? Yeah, there is an IIT director, WhatsApp group. It's an IIT director, WhatsApp group along with the ministry. So there are some ministry officials. So it's a restricted group. And that's it. Also, do you have a data limit on your Wi-Fi usage? I don't think so. I don't know. I've never experienced that. Have you picked up any slang after the time driving the IIT? No, actually not. I've read about some of the things, but I have not. Yeah, I'm not picked up. You must have won through a thorough thinking process when you join this particular Institute, especially your vision and the impact you want to create. So what are the major changes you're targeting here at IIT Delhi? See, when I came in here, the first thing which I have, you know, I believe that we have to do things where we have to work as a team. So I didn't want to start off by saying that, you know, these are the things I want to do. I want to change this. I want to change this. I want to change this. I want to understand the system work with people and figure out. But very clearly, one of the things that I want to do is I want to enhance the student experience. I want to make sure that we actually support individual student aspirations. Now this is easier said than done because basically what we need to do is we need to have a mentorship. And whether it is a faculty mentorship, but we try to see, you know, kids when they come in, we are not very sure what we want to do. And as an institution, we are providing an overall experience. So this is one of the things that we want to do. I also want to see that we give students a complete experience, including some opportunities to immerse and work in teams and work on real life problems. So you get a sense of what is there. So the first priority is to see that we make our curriculum more relevant. We see that we enhance the student experience. The second thing is when we talk in terms of a faculty experience, you know, a lot of faculty time goes in things which are beyond teaching and research and in dealing with all kinds of administrative things. So how can we enable and see that faculty time can concentrate on that? That's this. That's the second. The third thing is to see that everything that we do, we focus a little bit on more on societal impact. So these are the three broad things. The surveys had been floated in recent months regarding the course curriculum. And previously we, it was mandatory to complete 180 credits for the course completion, but now it has been reduced to like 150 approximately. So would you like to share about the new policies and curriculum review? So actually what we are doing is we are doing this is after about, I think eight to 10 years. We are doing a 360 degrees curriculum review. And essentially we've got a committee first, which is looking at an overall principle of what the curriculum should be looking at other curriculum in other IITs, looking at curriculum across the world and then seeing what should be the features, core, elective, flexibility, credits, everything. And that report is about to come out. It was supposed to come out sometime in this month in August. Once that report comes out, it will be sent out for discussion amongst all stakeholders. And then we will go through the process of looking at each individual curriculum. In each of this, we will not just, we will take student inputs, faculty inputs, alumni and industry inputs and hopefully when 2023, we will have a new curriculum. So basically we're looking at the principle and the policies that we're doing to further. Students remain under high stress levels. What are some changes we would like to bring about to probably re-warm the core structure or and to make a relatively stress free. I think support systems is one thing for stress free. Support systems, changing attitudes. I am not sure whether the stress comes from curriculum or credits or so you'll have to, I mean, we'll have to figure out what is happening in this. Curriculum, when we talk of curriculum, I think one of the important things is you will see that actually the nature of science and technology is changing very rapidly in many fields. And we need to have skill sets, we need to have variety, we need to have flexibility. And you know, there are two things. One is competition. The second is cooperation and in order to be successful, I believe that students also need to learn how to work in teams. We are too individualistic and competitive. Some part of it we have to do because there is a certain amount of rigor and certain amount of preparation that needs to be done. The challenge is how can we do this without creating stress? I don't know the answers, but I know that we would want to create a responsive support mechanism. Right. And I mean, talking to the Dean's students and Dean academics, as well as to faculty colleagues, we will get groups of faculty mentors along with senior students to create some systems like this.