Total number of pages: 13
Text on page:0

Knowledge and Society
Situating Sociology and Social Anthropology

T.K. OOMMEN

OXFORD

‘UNIVERSITY PRESS

Google

Text on page:1

9

Frontiers of Sociology

and Anthropology
Three Contexts

+

propose to argue in this chapter that we cannot comprehend

frontiers of social science disciplines independent of the political
circumstances in which they arose and are practised. The two
fundamental forces which mould and mutually influence disciplinary
frontiers are colonialism and nationalism. I will examine this
proposition with special reference to the cognate disciplines of
sociology and anthropology.

Both anthropology and sociology emerged in the West, that is Europe,
in two different phases of history and in drastically different political
circumstances. It is exciting to examine the implications of the
different trajectories of these disciplines and their impact in the
different zones in which they are practised. There is no consensus
about the time of origin of anthropology. Hodgen (1964) locates the
beginning of anthropology in the Greco-Roman period and modern
anthropology is nothing but the academic version of early
anthropology in this view. In contrast, according to Harris (1968) it
is the rise of cultural determinism which marked the shift away from
biological determinism that moulded the rise of anthropology, an
unsustainable view because cultural determinism crystallized only by
the beginning of the twentieth century while the evolutionary school

Google

Text on page:2

FRONTIERS OF SOCIOLOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 161

of anthropology emerged much before. In spite of these divergent
views regarding the crystallization of anthropology, there is consensus
‘on two counts: one, anthropology flowered during the colonial era
and two, the essence of anthropological perspective is that in order
to understand one’s society, one needs to study other societies.

It was therefore legitimate to conceptualize the subject matter of
anthropology as the study of others, both in their physical/racial and
cultural/social dimensions. But difficulty arises when anthropology
constructs the other it analyses as inferior and this understanding is
widely shared in the West, not only the geographical West but also
its spatial extensions—the New World. However, the other need not
be necessarily negative, it can be neutral, even positive (see Oommen
2002). The three others anthropology constructed and studied are
the savage, the black, and the ethnographic other; the first two being
specific others with definite geographic locales, while the third is a
general and generalized other.

The Random House Dictionary uses the following adjectives to
describe the savage: ‘fierce, untamed, uncivilized, barbarous,
unpolished, rude, wild, an uncivilized human being, a brutal or cruel
person, a rude boorish person’. And the savage was assigned the
lowest rung in the hierarchy of the great chain of being according to
the Christian doctrine of monogenesis that endorsed a common
origin for all human beings.

Although the savages existed in Europe also—the Samis of
Scandinavia, the Highlanders of Scotland, etc.—it is the discovery of
the New World which made it possible to locate them in a specific
geographic frontier, situated away from Europe. The Red Indian or
American Indian became the concrete expression of the savage
other. The savages in the European periphery were liquidated or
gradually got acculturated into the cultural mainstream. The
homogenization project of the nation state played a crucial role in
this context. In the twentieth century, according to White:

.». the idea of the Wild Man [read savage] was progressively despatialized.
This despatialization was attended by a compensatory process of psychic
interiorization. And the result has been that modern cultural anthropology
has conceptualized the idea of wildness as the repressed content of both
civilized and primitive humanity (1972: 7, italics in the original).

If anthropology were to focus only on the savage other with its
despatialization and interiorization, the idea of savage, the subject

Google

Text on page:3

162 KNOWLEDGE AND SOCIETY

matter of anthropology would have disappeared. But the
construction of the Black other provided the required new lease of
life for anthropology. I am not suggesting that these exercises—
constructions of savage other and Black other—followed sequentially,
butinsisting that a new other had to be invented for the continuation
of anthropology.

As in the case of savage, the idea of Black other too found wide
acceptance in Europe as a negative other. We read in the Random
House Dictionary the definition of Black invoking the following
epithets: ‘ ... lacking brightness, soiled or stained with dirt, gloomy,
pessimistic, dismal, sullen, boding ill, hostile, harmful, without any
moral right or goodness, evil, wicked, indicating disgrace or liability
to punishment, opposite to white, a member of a dark- skinned,
negro...”

Subsequently Black Africa, particularly sub-Saharan Africa, came
to be identified as the natural habitat of the black other. But the idea
of Black got internalized by the Europeans in general and those of
northwest Europe in particular with deep negative connotations. As
Nash notes: ‘In English image black became a partisan word. A black
sheep in the family, a black mark against one’s name, a black day, a
black look, a black lie, a black guard, and a black ball all were
expressions built into cultural consciousnesses’ (1974: 162-3).

Although the institution of slavery did exist independent of race/
colour, inferiorization of Blacks facilitated their subjection to slavery.
The export of Blacks from Africa to the Americas as slaves has to be
seen as a part of stigmatization and domination of the Black other.
The belief that race/colour is linked with intelligence, culture, and
capacity for institution building provided the rationale for
perpetuating slavery. The Black other was perceived to be capable
only of manual labour. The conditions of slavery reinforced the view
that Africans are irrational, incompetent, and psychologically distinct;
who never had a civilization and are not capable of creating one; a
stark contrast to the western man. The Aryan myth further exacerbated
this process of inferiorization of the Blacks. The attempt to link race,
language, and culture completed the process and the doctrine of
polygenesis justified the process of othering the Black.

However, the biological basis of human superiority anchored to
race has come to be interrogated through researches in physical
anthropology. The rising tide of democracy and the idea of equality
ingrained in it facilitated the abandoning of the doctrine of racial

 

Google

Text on page:4

FRONTIERS OF SOCIOLOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 163

superiority. However, while the idea of race has been rejected the
practice of racism persists in spite of the Herculean efforts of UNESCO
and human rights organizations. The persistence of everyday racism
is a testimony to that (see Essed 1991). Thus the diluted notion of
the Black other is now identified with the non-West; the juxtaposition
between the ‘we’ of the West and the ‘they’ of non-West persists.

This, however, does not mean that the other, the subject matter
of anthropology, disappeared; the ethnographic other became the
new focus. The process of othering has continued unabated. * ...
nineteenth century anthropology sanctioned an ideological process
by which relations between the West and its other, between
anthropology and its Object, were conceived not only as difference
but as distance in space and time’ (Fabian 1983: 147).

Similarly, Long notes that anthropological ‘ ... data on the Other
that was to be interpreted come from those removed in time and/or
in space. The problem of knowledge thus constitutes a structure of
distance and relationships. Objectivity as a scientific procedure
allied itself with the neutrality of the distancing in time and
space’ (1978: 406).

Thus it is clear that the object of study in anthropology was distant
in time as the societies studied were still evolving and in the throes
of evolution, as well as distant in space located as they were far from
Europe be it the Americas, Africa, Australia, or Asia. And this interest
in the other is nothing new in that the Greeks, Romans, Chinese, and
Arabs did attempt to understand the customs of alien peoples whom
they have conquered and colonized (see Needham 1959). But what
was new is that the European colonizers invoked this knowledge as
an instrument for controlling the colonized. It was not a device to
quench the thirst for curiosity; not mere butterfly collection. The
colonial government, for example, primarily used anthropological
data collected in British India. The enormous expenses incurred for
it were justified, as the data collected were required for the
maintenance of law and order in the colonies. Thus, the non-West
had become an object of study for the West and anthropology was the
designated discipline for that purpose. However, the rise of
ethnomethodology and the invoking of native categories contest the
conventional view that these people have no ideas butare only capable
of behaviour. The gulf between the anthropologist and the other is
also being reduced by incorporating the voice of people into the
repertoire of research.

Google

Text on page:5

164 KNOWLEDGE AND SOCIETY

The trajectory of sociology in the West is in stark contrast to this (see
Chapters 6-8). Sociology was ineluctably linked to nation state right
from the beginning. And the conceptual conflation between state
and nation rendered sociology utterly state-centric. The geographical
frontiers of the state determine the disciplinary frontiers of sociology.

Put so baldly many will register instant disapproval. Let me
therefore dwell on this briefly. When we refer to French, German,
British, Soviet, Swedish, US, or Indian sociology the reference is to
states and not nations, because the entities referred to above are not
nations or even nation states, but certainly states. The co-terminality
between the frontiers of state and that of sociology is a product of
historical circumstance as I have argued in Chapter 6.

The conceptual conflation between state and nation reinforced the
state centrism ingrained in the discipline of sociology. This is evident
in various attempts to analyse and understand ‘national sociologies’.
In a book entitled National Traditions in Sociology, published in 1989
there are two separate chapters on the two ‘national traditions’ of
West Germany and East Germany. If the book were to be published
after the fall of the Berlin Wall there would have been only one
‘national tradition’, relating to German sociology. In the same book
there is only one Chapter on the ‘national tradition’ relating to the
Soviet Union (see Genov 1989). Had the book been published after
the dismantling of the Soviet Union there would have been several
national traditions representing ‘Soviet Sociology’. One can multiply
examples but I hope the point is made: the frontiers of state and that
of the discipline of sociology are inextricably intertwined.

The linking of the discipline of sociology with the phenomenon of
modernity and the institution of nation state (and by implication the
ideology of nationalism which produces it) has profound implica-
tions. Two self-evident propositions follow from attaching sociology
to modernity. One, non-modern societies will not witness the birth
and flowering of sociology; they will have only anthropology according
to this view. This isa highly contestable proposition because a historical
conjunction between modernity and the rise of sociology in the West
need not repeat itself in the non-West. Two, sociology will wither away
as modernity recedes into the background and globality forges ahead.
One may note here thata particular discipline may emerge in specific
historical conditions but its demise need not happen with the

Google

Text on page:6

FRONTIERS OF SOCIOLOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 165

disappearance of those conditions. The resilience of anthropology
in spite of the death of colonialism, the womb out of which it emerged,
is a testimony to this. The sane route to avoid ephemerality of
disciplines is to constantly recast them so as to transcend particular
historical conjunctions. Thus we can legitimately speak of sociologies
of premodern, modern, and post-modem societies.

To link sociology with nation state also has three disastrous
implications. First, those who did not succeed in creating their own
nation states will not have their sociology; there is a French sociology
but no sociology of Brittany; there is a British sociology but hardly any
Welsh sociology; there is a Spanish sociology but no Catlan sociology.
The Kurds are vivisected across several states; should it mean that
there is no Kurdish sociology? In this rendition the fate of a nation’s
sociology is inextricably intertwined with its political fortune; no
state, no sociology seems to be the dictum. Here anthropology is at
an advantage because its disciplinary autonomy independent of the
state existed from the beginning; indeed studying stateless peoples
was its initial vocation.

Second, to link sociology with nation state is against the very grain
of the discipline. The primary mission of sociology is to study social
and cultural structures in all varieties of societies. That is, sociology
hasa disciplinary vested interest in diversity, both social and cultural.
But the avowed objective of nation state in the West was to dismantle
diversity and create homogenization. It is an unfortunate paradox
thatin spite of the fact that the souls of sociology and nation state pull
in opposite directions they are chained together in one body, that of
the body politic. This isomorphism of political and disciplinary
frontiers is to the detriment of sociology and yet most sociologists are
impervious to it.

Third, the discipline gets linked with the pathological dimension
of nationalism. The three prominent pathological bases of nationalism
are racism, religious fundamentalism, and linguistic chauvinism.
And wherever sociology comes to be identified with these pathological
versions of nationalism, sociology loses its humanistic value orientation.
‘The way out is not to throw away the baby along with the bathwater.
Sociology should consciously pursue emancipatory nationalism
anchored to secularism, democracy, and humanism. For this, the
discipline should distance itself from the state because in the
contemporary world national pathologies are promoted and sustained
through state power.

 

Google

Text on page:7

166 KNOWLEDGE AND SOCIETY

The conceptual decoupling of state and nation is an important
device to create a sociology with emancipatory potentialities. Thus in
a multinational state there are several national traditions but in
reality they are collapsed into one national tradition, usually the
dominant one, thereby relegating the dominated national traditions
into oblivion. This leads to the ‘cognitive blackout’ of the weak and
smaller national traditions as is widely known.

Anthropology and sociology underwent critical changes in the
process of their transplantation into the non-West, particularly in the
ex-colonial polities. The conventional distinction between the three
worlds—First, Second, and Third—is highly misleading in this
context. The differential specification here is between the exempire
states and post-colonial states. For example, on the basis of a meeting
of anthropology teachers from Oxford, Cambridge, and London,
Radcliffe-Brown wrote:

We agreed to use ‘ethnography’ as the term for descriptive accounts of
nonditerate peoples. The hypothetical reconstruction of ‘history’ of such
peoples was accepted as the task of ethnology and pre-historic archaeology.
The comparative study of the institutions of primitive societies was accepted
as the tasks of social anthropology, and this name was preferred to
‘sociology’ (1952: 276).

Social anthropologists from other countries of Europe made similar
distinctions. In contrast, the American conception of anthropology
is that of a unified field of enquiry of humankind with culture as its
central unifying concept, the uniqueness of the human species being
its capacity to create and consume culture. American anthropological
holism squarely recognizes the interrelations between the biological,
mental, social, and cultural dimensions.

I suggest that there is a ‘political’ reason for perceiving sociology
and social anthropology in a different vein in post-colonial societies
as compared with Europe. As noted earlier, the distinction between
sociology and social anthropology in Europe is made on the basis of
‘us’ and ‘them’; the latter category of people were not only different
physically and culturally but they were situated far away spatially in
the Americas, Africa, Australia, or Asia. But the First Nations of the
New World, different as they are physically and culturally, became a

Google

Text on page:8

FRONTIERS OF SOCIOLOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 167

part of the same ‘nation’ along with the colonizers. To carve out a
distinct discipline to study cocitizens, although they are different,
appear to be politically incorrect, even unethical. The fusion of
citizenship and nationality, the merging of the political and cultural
frontiers, was untenable even in those colonies where Europeans
have immigrated, settled down, and replicated their culture and
society. It is no accident that the idea of multicultural citizenship is
formulated on the basis of the empirical realities of the New World,
wherein the cultural and political frontiers are not conterminous
(see Kymlicka 1995).

While there is a difference with regard to conceptualization of the
disciplines of sociology and anthropology between the New World
and the Old World of Europe, that distinction is more telling between
Europe and the Old World of Asia and Africa. The common
understanding in Europe that sociology focuses on complex societies
and anthropology on simpler peoples is not endorsed by non-western
sociologists and social anthropologists. Further, there is a persisting
streak in Europe to view social anthropogy as a superior discipline
as compared with sociology (see Chapters 2 and 7). While in the New
World anthropology is holistic and culture-centri i i
segmental and society-centric. This academic
without invoking any superiority-inferiority syndrome makes for a
peaceful co-existence of these disciplines. In the post-colonial Old
World of Asia and Africa, the relationship between sociology and
social anthropology is one of ambiguity.

An important reason for this ambiguity arises from the shared
interests of sociologists and anthropologists to ‘integrate’ the tribes
into the mainstream ‘national society’. I shall illustrate this point
with reference to the Indian subcontinent by citing two examples.
G.S. Ghurye was trained under W.H.R. Rivers, the British
anthropologist, but he became one of the founding fathers of sociology
in India. He held the view that the entire Indian population was
gradually evolving into a single composite ‘Indian race’. Further he
argued that there is hardly any difference between lower castes and
tribes on the one hand and the Hindu upper castes on the other and
hence there was no justification for the state in India to provide for
any ameliorative measures for their development. In fact, his position
was that such steps would go against the process of integrating India
into a ‘nation’ of one common race and culture (see Ghurye 1932,
1943).

  

Google

Text on page:9

168 KNOWLEDGE AND SOCIETY

In the same vein anthropologist B.S. Guha believed in the unity
of the ‘Indian race’ and he concluded after discussing the issues
involved in the administration of Indian Aborigines:

The essential thing is to realise that the tribal and general population are
inhabitants of the same country and their interests are closely interwoven
for good or bad. The fostering of the growth of a common outcome and
common interest should be the ideal for which both should strive. The
administration of the primitive tribes should be so planned that the purpose
is served by developing them as their own models and thought, but also
gradually bringing them up as full and integral members of the country and
participating like the rest in her joys and sorrows (Guha 1951: 44).

Three patterns clearly emerge: for the anthropologists of the Old
World Europe, the object of study is a distinct and distant other; for
the anthropologist of the New World also the object of study is
different physically and culturally but belongs to the same ‘nation’ and
are fellow citizens. For the anthropologist of the Old World of Asia the
object of study is constituted not simply by co-citizens but who should
also be integrated into a common national race and culture! Under-
standably, as the discipline of anthropology has emerged in different
political settings and as sociology was born in nation states, these
influence their frontiers.

I want to conclude this chapter by drawing attention to four
implications of interlocking frontiers—disciplinary, political,
geographic, and symbolic. Both modern sociology and anthropology
arose in the West from the womb of the renaissance and yet their
trajectories drastically differ. Anthropology’s uniqueness stems from
its construction of the human other as its object of study. But its
mission varied over the centuries. If during the colonial period
anthropology assisted the empire states to civilize the other, during
the Cold War period it helped the nation state to modernize the
other. At present, anthropology is in service of bringing the other
into the global arena.

What is important for the present purpose is to note that there is
no isomorphism between political, geographic, and disciplinary
frontiers in the case of anthropology. The story of western sociology is
entirely different; it emerged in the nation state which is geared to
modernize itself. Sociology did address the issues of social reform and

Google

Text on page:10

FRONTIERS OF SOCIOLOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 169

amelioration of fellow citizens. That is, sociology functioned within
the political and geographical frontiers of the nation state. These
frontiers—geographical, political, and disciplinary—converged.

Western colonialism transplanted anthropology and sociology into
the colonies but their characteristics in the colonies differed
depending upon the nature of colonialism: replicative and retreatist
(see Oommen 1996: 112). The replicative colonialism, which re-
produced European Society in the New World, did keep the
distinction between sociology and social anthropology. But if the
former focused on the social structure of the mainstream of national
society, the latter studied the native peoples of the national society
as well as the tribes and peasants elsewhere through the regime of
‘area studies’. Thus there was a blurring of the boundary between
sociology and anthropology in the New World unlike in Europe.

The retreatist colonialism of Asia and Africa produced a different
trajectory for sociology and anthropology; the object of analyses for
both was co-citizens of post-colonial states. The frontiers of the two
disciplines got substantially blurred. Initially social anthropologists
focused on tribes and sociologists studied peasantry and urban social
life. But this division was not neat and tidy and as social
anthropologists expanded their objects of study to include peasantry
and urban dwellers, the frontiers of the two disciplines, sociology and
social anthropology, got fused. The attempt to fall back upon
participant observation as the differentiating element of social
anthropology also did not help to keep the distinction between the
two disciplines for two reasons. One, as social anthropologists started
studying peasantry and urban settlements they had used other
techniques of data collection. Two, most sociologists opted for a
collage of techniques of data collection.

The second implication of having shared frontiers for sociology
and social anthropology in Asia and Africa can be discerned through
the debate on indigenization. In Europe such a discourse is irrelevant
in that these disciplines originated there; they are indigenous. But
the claim of European sociologists and social anthropologists that
the knowledge they produce is of universal applicability and validity
is contested outside Europe. In the New World, however, the
contestation is not sharp for two reasons: (1) replicative colonialism
reproduced European society in these settlement societies and (2) the
division of labour between sociology and social anthropology, thats,
studying complex and simple societies, is maintained. However, the

Google

Text on page:11

170 KNOWLEDGE AND SOCIETY

distinction between sociology studying one’s own society and social
anthropology analysing ‘other cultures’ as in Europe got obliterated
as noted above. In contrast, the eagerness to indigenize sociology and
social anthropology was acute in the colonies of Asia and Africa
because these are perceived as colonial transplants. The tendency
was intensified during the height of anti-colonial movement
(Mukherjee 1979: 229).

The third implication of common or differing frontiers is also
evident in the practice of anthropology and sociology. Conventionally
social anthropologists studied small-scale societies (for example,
tribes) or small units in large-scale societies (for example, peasant
villages). Given the ‘method’ they employ, namely participant
observation, they develop a close and often long association with the
people they study. It is not uncommon that social anthropologists
revisit these tribes and villages several times in the course of their
professional career; the people they study become ‘their’ people.
And the norm seems to be that one social anthropologist studies one
people. What is reported is often accepted and acknowledged as the
‘truth’ about that society. But if two social anthropologists have studied
the same unit the findings may not be similar and even become
controversial. Instances are the study of a Mexican village by Oscar
Lewis, earlier studied by Robert Redfield and the study of Samoa by
Margaret Mead and Derek Freeman.

However, the tradition of an anthropologist studying one tribe or
village is confined to Europe and to the extension of European
society in the New World. In the post-colonial states of Africa and Asia
this tradition is not observed. For example, most social anthropologists
of South Asia shift their object of research several times; they study
different units and themes in the course of their professional career.
This is proximate to sociologists the world over who study different
units and themes in the course of their academic career. Thus there
are different styles of practising sociology and social anthropology. If
for sociologists everywhere, shifting the frontiers of their research is
the norm, for the social anthropologists of Asia and Africa this is not
uncommon. However, the social anthropologists of Europe and the
New World seem to be adhering to the classical norm for social
anthropology: one tribe/village/urban settlement, one social
anthropologist. Indeed there are advantages of confining to the
‘frontiers’ of one’s research unit as a lifetime avocation, but the

Google

Text on page:12

FRONTIERS OF SOCIOLOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 171

disadvantage is that these anthropologists often become victims of
intellectual claustrophobia.

Finally, I want to allude to the ‘frontier’ shared by anthropology
and western Christianity. The dilemma that western Christianity faced
becomes pertinent here. In the early phase of colonialism in the New
World, the western colonizers did not face any moral dilemma in
slaughtering savages because Christian belief at that time was that
savages were without souls and hence need not be treated with
compassion. But by the early sixteenth century the Pope declared
them to be fully human and this posed a moral problem as to how the
savages are to be treated (see Hadden 1934). Coupled with this, the
theory of Christian monogenesis accepted by early anthropology
endorsed all human beings as having a common origin (see Hodgen
1964). However the theory of polygenesis, propelled by the secular
doctrine facilitated the interests of the colonial states to continue
with genocide and culturocide of the savages. anthropology came to
the rescue of western Christianity in this context.

In the Judeo-Christian orientation, the representation of divinity embraced
all peoples, but created a distinction in the conception of the true self and
the untrue self, Anthropology, in continuing this structural principle,
embraced the humanity as a whole but made the contrast between the West
and the non-west which corresponded to the dichotomy between the true
self and the untrue self, the West shared in the attributes of the true self
(Pandian 1985: 10).

Perhaps this shared symbolic frontier between Christianity and
anthropology explains its persistence in spite of the death of
colonialism and birth of sociology, a plausible replacementforit! But
the regime of ‘area studies’ perpetuated anthropology during the
heydays of nation state. In spite of globalization, anthropology seems
to persist because of its symbolic connection with Christianity. That
is, anthropology and sociology would remain separate disciplines in
the West but in the rest of the world their frontiers would remain
intermeshed. India provides an illuminating example of this.

Google

